pages/resources.markdown, before:

---
title: Resources
---

## Blogs

- **[A Collection of Unmitigated Pedantry][]** is written by a
  historian and looks at the depiction of history (including historic
  fantasy) in popular culture, and talks about how it would *really*
  be done.  There is so much good stuff here, start with the
  [Resources for World-Builders][acup-res] page.

- **[The Alexandrian][]** is a treasure trove of information, the
  article series on [Node-Based Scenario Design][a-nodes-1] and
  [Advanced Node-Based Design][a-nodes-2] have really helped me think
  about how to structure my games, and the series on [Jacquaying the
  Dungeon][a-jaq] has made my dungeons less boring.

- **[The Angry GM][]** has a style which grates on a lot of people
  (and I'm not a fan of it either), but if you can look past that
  there's a lot of good advice here.

- **[ars lundi][]** is a game designer and creator of the legendary
  [West Marches][al-wm] style of play.

- **[Goblin Punch][]** is the home of the [Goblin Laws of
  Gaming][gp-glog], and great creatures like the [False
  Hydra][gp-hydra].

[A Collection of Unmitigated Pedantry]: https://acoup.blog/
[acup-res]: https://acoup.blog/resources-for-world-builders/
[The Alexandrian]: https://thealexandrian.net/
[a-nodes-1]: https://thealexandrian.net/wordpress/7949/roleplaying-games/node-based-scenario-design-part-1-the-plotted-approach
[a-nodes-2]: https://thealexandrian.net/wordpress/8171/roleplaying-games/advanced-node-based-design-part-1-moving-between-nodes
[a-jaq]: https://thealexandrian.net/wordpress/13085/roleplaying-games/jaquaying-the-dungeon
[The Angry GM]: https://theangrygm.com/
[ars lundi]: http://arsludi.lamemage.com/
[al-wm]: http://arsludi.lamemage.com/index.php/78/grand-experiments-west-marches/
[Goblin Punch]: http://goblinpunch.blogspot.com/
[gp-glog]: http://goblinpunch.blogspot.com/2016/05/the-glog.html
[gp-hydra]: http://goblinpunch.blogspot.com/2014/09/false-hydra.html

## Tools

- **[Dungeon Scrawl][]** is a simple browser-based mapping tool.  I
  often use this to draw out the layout of a building, then export an
  image and continue editing it in GIMP.

- **[donjon][]** has a huge number of generators, for all sorts of things.

- **[The Fantasy Name Generator][]** can be a bit stereotypical, but
  if you just need a name *now* in one of dozens of different
  categories, it's got your back.

- **[The One-page Dungeon Generator][]** isn't going to power your
  full campaign, but it can be a source of inspiration.

[Dungeon Scrawl]: https://probabletrain.itch.io/dungeon-scrawl
[donjon]: https://donjon.bin.sh/
[The Fantasy Name Generator]: https://www.fantasynamegenerators.com/
[The One-page Dungeon Generator]: https://watabou.itch.io/one-page-dungeon

## Youtube channels

- [Matthew Colville][]'s **[Running the Game][mc-rtg]** series has
  been a great help to me, even though I've never run D&D.  I
  particularly enjoyed the video on [roleplaying][mc-rp].

- **[Modern History TV][]** is about the world of medieval England,
  and what it was really like.

- **[Questing Beast][]** reviews a lot of great OSR books.

- **[Seth Skorkowsky][]** reviews a lot of scenarios, makes great
  system review/overviews (like this great multi-part [Call of Cthulhu
  intro][ss-coc]).

[Matthew Colville]: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCkVdb9Yr8fc05_VbAVfskCA
[mc-rtg]: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLlUk42GiU2guNzWBzxn7hs8MaV7ELLCP_
[mc-rp]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7YCVHnItKuY
[Modern History TV]: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCMjlDOf0UO9wSijFqPE9wBw
[Questing Beast]: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCvYwePdbWSEwUa-Pk02u3Zw
[Seth Skorkowsky]: https://www.youtube.com/c/SethSkorkowskyAuthor
[ss-coc]: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL25p5gPY6qKWQgHm7vGbIoeuuLdKtlVBj

Commit message:

Add The Monsters Know What They're Doing to resources

pages/resources.markdown, after:

---
title: Resources
---

## Blogs

- **[A Collection of Unmitigated Pedantry][]** is written by a
  historian and looks at the depiction of history (including historic
  fantasy) in popular culture, and talks about how it would *really*
  be done.  There is so much good stuff here, start with the
  [Resources for World-Builders][acup-res] page.

- **[The Alexandrian][]** is a treasure trove of information, the
  article series on [Node-Based Scenario Design][a-nodes-1] and
  [Advanced Node-Based Design][a-nodes-2] have really helped me think
  about how to structure my games, and the series on [Jacquaying the
  Dungeon][a-jaq] has made my dungeons less boring.

- **[The Angry GM][]** has a style which grates on a lot of people
  (and I'm not a fan of it either), but if you can look past that
  there's a lot of good advice here.

- **[ars lundi][]** is a game designer and creator of the legendary
  [West Marches][al-wm] style of play.

- **[Goblin Punch][]** is the home of the [Goblin Laws of
  Gaming][gp-glog], and great creatures like the [False
  Hydra][gp-hydra].

- **[The Monsters Know What They're Doing][]** is an exploration of
  monster tactics.  While written for fifth edition [glo:dnd], the
  [Why These Tactics?][mk-why] page is fairly widely applicable.

[A Collection of Unmitigated Pedantry]: https://acoup.blog/
[acup-res]: https://acoup.blog/resources-for-world-builders/
[The Alexandrian]: https://thealexandrian.net/
[a-nodes-1]: https://thealexandrian.net/wordpress/7949/roleplaying-games/node-based-scenario-design-part-1-the-plotted-approach
[a-nodes-2]: https://thealexandrian.net/wordpress/8171/roleplaying-games/advanced-node-based-design-part-1-moving-between-nodes
[a-jaq]: https://thealexandrian.net/wordpress/13085/roleplaying-games/jaquaying-the-dungeon
[The Angry GM]: https://theangrygm.com/
[ars lundi]: http://arsludi.lamemage.com/
[al-wm]: http://arsludi.lamemage.com/index.php/78/grand-experiments-west-marches/
[Goblin Punch]: http://goblinpunch.blogspot.com/
[gp-glog]: http://goblinpunch.blogspot.com/2016/05/the-glog.html
[gp-hydra]: http://goblinpunch.blogspot.com/2014/09/false-hydra.html
[The Monsters Know What They're Doing]: https://www.themonstersknow.com/
[mk-why]: https://www.themonstersknow.com/why-these-tactics/

## Tools

- **[Dungeon Scrawl][]** is a simple browser-based mapping tool.  I
  often use this to draw out the layout of a building, then export an
  image and continue editing it in GIMP.

- **[donjon][]** has a huge number of generators, for all sorts of things.

- **[The Fantasy Name Generator][]** can be a bit stereotypical, but
  if you just need a name *now* in one of dozens of different
  categories, it's got your back.

- **[The One-page Dungeon Generator][]** isn't going to power your
  full campaign, but it can be a source of inspiration.

[Dungeon Scrawl]: https://probabletrain.itch.io/dungeon-scrawl
[donjon]: https://donjon.bin.sh/
[The Fantasy Name Generator]: https://www.fantasynamegenerators.com/
[The One-page Dungeon Generator]: https://watabou.itch.io/one-page-dungeon

## Youtube channels

- [Matthew Colville][]'s **[Running the Game][mc-rtg]** series has
  been a great help to me, even though I've never run D&D.  I
  particularly enjoyed the video on [roleplaying][mc-rp].

- **[Modern History TV][]** is about the world of medieval England,
  and what it was really like.

- **[Questing Beast][]** reviews a lot of great OSR books.

- **[Seth Skorkowsky][]** reviews a lot of scenarios, makes great
  system review/overviews (like this great multi-part [Call of Cthulhu
  intro][ss-coc]).

[Matthew Colville]: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCkVdb9Yr8fc05_VbAVfskCA
[mc-rtg]: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLlUk42GiU2guNzWBzxn7hs8MaV7ELLCP_
[mc-rp]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7YCVHnItKuY
[Modern History TV]: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCMjlDOf0UO9wSijFqPE9wBw
[Questing Beast]: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCvYwePdbWSEwUa-Pk02u3Zw
[Seth Skorkowsky]: https://www.youtube.com/c/SethSkorkowskyAuthor
[ss-coc]: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL25p5gPY6qKWQgHm7vGbIoeuuLdKtlVBj
