posts/dice-rolls-in-traveller.markdown, before:

---
title: Dice rolls in Traveller
date: 2021-09-10
system: traveller
topic: mechanics
excerpt: |
    [glo:traveller] uses a `2d6` dice system where characters add their
    relevant characteristic and skill levels, with various possible
    target numbers and situational modifiers.  It also has a notion of
    "task chains", where one roll gives a bonus or a penalty to
    another.  This post runs through all these variations, with lots of
    graphs.
---

When a [glo:pc] wants to do something, the [glo:gm] might call for a
roll to see whether they succeed or, if success or failure is a given,
how well they do.

In [glo:traveller], the player rolls [glo:dice-notation "`2d6`"],
adding their characteristic modifier, skill level (or a penalty of -3
if they lack the skill entirely), and any other modifiers the rules
specify, generally against a target number of 8.  In situations where
there is no relevant skill, the player just adds their characteristic
modifier: for example, forcing a door open would just be
[glo:dice-notation "`2d6 + Strength Mod`"].

![Chance of success for a task check against a difficulty of 8.](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/basic.png)

The average result for [glo:dice-notation "`2d6`"] is 7, but the usual
difficulty target is 8.  The average characteristic modifier is 0, but
finishing character creation with skills at level 1 or 2 is easily
doable, so almost all characters do have situations where they have
even-or-better odds.  Even odds isn't that great in a risky situation
though, so the rules implicitly encourage players to seek out other
bonuses, or to change the situation to be safer.

For the graphs in this post, I've make some assumptions about the
ranges of modifiers:

- The characteristic modifier ranges from -3 to +3 (which is the case
  unless you're using the variant rules for extreme characteristic
  scores in the *Traveller Companion*)

- The skill level modifier is -3 for an unskilled character, or ranges
  from 0 to +3 for a skilled character

- Other miscellaneous modifiers specified in the rules range from -4
  to +4

So the total modifier for a roll ranges from -10 to +10.


## Difficulty levels

Checks have eight difficulty levels, with the target number increasing
by 2 every level from Simple (2+) to Impossible (16+).

![Chance of success for a task check, showing all eight difficulties.](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/difficulties.png)

On the one hand, I like having different difficulty levels to pick
from.  On the other hand, this feels like too many.  I'm a big fan of
[only rolling when the outcome is in doubt][], so I'm not sure when
I'd ask for a roll for a Simple or Easy task.  Even a Routine task
feels a bit much.  I'd probably have the [glos:pc] succeed
automatically at all of those (though, with a caveat: see the next
section on timeframes).

"Impossible" is also misnamed, as you just need a +4 total modifier,
which is achievable with a bit of luck in character creation, to have
a chance of success: "impossible" should *mean* "impossible".

Rolling a 16 won't let you punch a hole through a starship with your
bare fists.

[only rolling when the outcome is in doubt]: post/roll-in-the-open.html


## Timeframes

One thing I like a lot about the [glo:traveller] task check system is
that it has rules for increasing or reducing the difficulty of a task
check by going faster or slower.  In most systems, that's kind of up
to [glo:gm] fiat, but here it's codified.

The timeframes are:

- [glo:dice-notation "`1d6`"] seconds
- [glo:dice-notation "`1d6`"] combat rounds
- [glo:dice-notation "`10×1d6 `"] seconds
- [glo:dice-notation "`1d6`"] minutes
- [glo:dice-notation "`10×1d6`"] minutes
- [glo:dice-notation "`1d6`"] hours
- [glo:dice-notation "`4×1d6`"] hours
- [glo:dice-notation "`10×1d6`"] hours
- [glo:dice-notation "`1d6`"] days

There are a few small examples given for each.  For example, applying
first aid takes minutes, whereas repairing a damaged ship takes tens
of hours.

A player can chose to move up or down on the timeframes, doing a check
faster or slower than usual.  Each step moved up (going faster) adds a
cumulative -2 modifier; each step moved down (going slower) adds a
cumulative +2 modifier.

So, while I would not normally make someone roll for a Routine task, I
likely would still have them roll if they were doing an Average task
one step slower than usual.

My only small complaint with the timeframe rules is that I wish this
was explained as adjusting the difficulty level of the check up or
down, rather than as adding a modifier.  The maths is exactly the
same, but it feels inconsistent with the rules for doing multiple
tasks at once, which *are* explained as adjusting the difficulty
level.


## Effect & static target numbers

The "effect" of a task check is by how much the player beat (or failed
to beat) the difficulty.  So, a roll of 9 has effect 3 if the check is
Routine, 1 if the check is Average, -1 if the check is Difficult, and
so on.

There's an optional rule for using the effect to pick a degree of
success, if the situation requires more nuance than just a binary pass
or fail:

- **Exceptional Failure:** the check fails with effect -6 or less
- **Average Failure:** the check fails with effect -5 to -2
- **Marginal Failure:** the check fails with effect -1
- **Marginal Success:** the check passes with effect 0
- **Average Success:** the check passes with effect 1 to 5
- **Exceptional Success:** the check passes with effect 6 or more

We'll see these thresholds again when discussing task chains.

An alternative way to think about [glo:traveller] task checks is that
you're trying to roll an effect of 0 or more.  So, there's a fixed
target number you want to equal or beat, and the [glo:gm] has eight
possible penalties he can subtract from your roll depending on the
difficulty of the situation.

Is that a useful way to look at the rules?  When actually playing,
probably not.  But for this post, it means I don't have to draw eight
separate difficulties in all of the graphs.

![Chance of success for a task check, with target number normalised to zero.](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/normalised-difficulties.png)

So the range on the X axis of the graphs is now -26 (an unskilled
character with a -3 characteristic modifier, with a -4 modifier from
other rules, attempting an "impossible" task) to 8 (a character with a
+3 characteristic modifier and +3 skill level modifier, with a +4
modifier from other rules, attempting an easy task).

But we can trim that range down to -13 to -2, as everything lower has
a 0% chance and everything higher has a 100% chance:

![Chance of success for a task check, with target number normalised to zero (trimmed).](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/normalised-difficulties-trimmed.png)

This is the formulation we'll use going forwards.


## Situational advantages and disadvantages

Let's say that a [glo:pc] is trying to hotwire a locked-down jump
drive.

Perhaps our would-be pirate has an easy time of it.  Maybe they're
blessed with a particularly competent assistant; or there's a detailed
diagram explaining exactly how the lock works.

On the other hand, perhaps they have an unusually hard time.  Maybe
the engine room is really small and awkward, so the [glo:pc] can't get
a good look at the mechanism; or they have shoddy tools.

In these cases, the skill-based task itself (hotwiring the jump drive)
is exactly the same, it's just the circumstances around it which vary.
So making the task check easier or harder doesn't really fit.

To handle this sort of situational effect, the [glo:gm] might give the
player a *boon die* or a *bane die*.  The player now rolls
[glo:dice-notation "`3d6`"], keeping the better (or worse) of the two
rolls.  Or the [glo:gm] might say that success or failure is
impossible given these additional situational factors, and so remove
the roll entirely.

![Chance of success for a task check with a boon or bane die, with target number normalised to zero.](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/boon-bane.png)

Boon and bane dice cancel out and do not stack: a check with one boon
and one bane is rolled normally; a check with two boons is rolled with
one boon; a check with two boons and one bane is rolled with one boon;
and so on.


## Task chains

Let's say that the [glos:pc] are preparing to jump to another system:
the astrogator plots the route, then the engineer inputs it into the
jump drive.  The quality of route should affect how well the engineer
is able to configure the jump drive, and [glo:traveller] handles this
sort of thing with "task chains": a sequence of connected task checks
where the effect of a check applies a modifier to the next check in
the chain.

- If the previous check failed with effect -6 or less, the current check gets a -3 modifier
- If the previous check failed with effect -5 to -2, the current check gets a -2 modifier
- If the previous check failed with effect -1, the current check gets a -1 modifier
- If the previous check passed with effect 0, the current check gets a +0 modifier
- If the previous check passed with effect 1 to 5, the current check gets a +1 modifier
- If the previous check passed with effect 6 or more, the current check gets a +2 modifier

First, let's have a look at the chance each modifier has of coming up:

![Chance of each task chain modifier.](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/task-chain-dms.png)

I find this pleasantly asymmetric.

Now, let's look at the chance of the second task in a chain
succeeding.  Here, the `Total Modifier` in the Y axis does not include
the task chain modifier from the first check (that's why this is a
heatmap and not just a line chart).  The colour shows the chance of
succeeding on the second check: lighter is better.

![Chance of succeeding at the second task in a chain.](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/task-chain-heat.png)

An interesting thing to note here is that because the positive and
negative modifiers from the first check are bounded, there are plenty
of cases where the result of the second check doesn't depend on the
result of the first check at all.  For example, if the second check
has a `Total Modifier minus Difficulty Target` of 1, they will succeed
no matter how badly the first check goes.  But if the second check has
a `Total Modifier minus Difficulty Target` of -15, they will fail no
matter how well the first check goes.

So, with a huge penalty, the players will need to seek out some other
advantage: like going more slowly and carefully, reducing the
difficulty at the cost of time; or finding some advantage which gives
them a boon.

Compare with what it would look like if the second check just used the
effect of the first check as a modifier directly:

![Chance of succeeding at the second task in a chain, when using the effect of the first check directly.](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/task-chain-heat-unbound.png)

Very different!


## Trying again

Unlike [glo:coc], [glo:traveller] has nothing like [pushing a roll][].
So if you want to allow a player to try a task check again, you'll
have to improvise.

I think either the pushed-roll system (try again, but with
significantly worse consequences for failure) or a task chain (try
again, but with a modifier based on how badly you failed) would work,
and each probably makes more sense in different situations.

![Chance of succeeding ehen trying a check again, with target number normalised to zero.](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/try-again.png)

Interestingly, pushing a roll is better if your `Total Modifier minus
Difficulty Target` is below -9, but a task chain is better at -9 or
higher.  This is the point at which the task chain tips over to being
more likely to have a positive than negative modifier.  So keep that
in mind if the character is really poorly suited to a situation:
perhaps they *should* first have to climb out of the hole they dug for
themselves, rather than just get a second attempt!

For example, if the [glo:pc] is trying to repair something, and they
badly fail, then a task chain makes sense as they now need to repair
the original damage *and* what new damage they just caused.  Whereas
if the [glo:pc] is trying to find a target in some surveillance tapes,
failure doesn't destroy the tapes, but trying again might cost them
much more time than they're comfortable spending, so pushing the roll
makes more sense.

[pushing a roll]: post/dice-rolls-in-call-of-cthulhu.html


## Going head-to-head

For opposed checks, the two characters simply roll, and the one with
the higher effect wins.  Though oddly, at least to me, the
degree-of-success rule is *not* used here: it's just the raw effect
number.

Here the colour shows the first character's chance of succeeding
despite the second character's opposition: lighter is better.

![Chance of succeeding at an opposed roll.](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/opposed-heat.png)

Opposed checks are used if two characters are directly competing with
or opposing each other.  They're generally *not* used in combat
(except for grappling), where the defender imposes a negative modifier
to the attacker's roll instead, rather than themselves rolling to
resist.  I think I prefer opposed combat rolls, but systems which do
them seem pretty rare.

If it did use the degrees of success, it would look like this:

![Chance of succeeding at an opposed roll.](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/opposed-heat-chain-dm.png)

This looks like it could be an interesting mechanic to me!  The second
character's ability to oppose is limited, and so the first character
has better odds overall.

But, interesting as it might be, it's not a rule.  Maybe a "negative
task chain" would make sense as a house-rule for asynchronous
conflicts?


## The golden rule

As always, before rolling anything, ask if a roll is *really* needed
here.

If the task is challenging but the [glo:pc] can spend as long on it as
they want, shouldn't they just automatically succeed?

Commit message:

Re-do Traveller dice roll graphs to be more colour blind friendly
This also fixes an error in the "trying again" section about chained
rolls.

posts/dice-rolls-in-traveller.markdown, after:

---
title: Dice rolls in Traveller
date: 2021-09-10
system: traveller
topic: mechanics
excerpt: |
    [glo:traveller] uses a `2d6` dice system where characters add their
    relevant characteristic and skill levels, with various possible
    target numbers and situational modifiers.  It also has a notion of
    "task chains", where one roll gives a bonus or a penalty to
    another.  This post runs through all these variations, with lots of
    graphs.
---

!!! attention ""
    The "Trying again" section was initially incorrect, and said that a
    task chain was better than pushing the roll in some situations.

When a [glo:pc] wants to do something, the [glo:gm] might call for a
roll to see whether they succeed or, if success or failure is a given,
how well they do.

In [glo:traveller], the player rolls [glo:dice-notation "`2d6`"],
adding their characteristic modifier, skill level (or a penalty of -3
if they lack the skill entirely), and any other modifiers the rules
specify, generally against a target number of 8.  In situations where
there is no relevant skill, the player just adds their characteristic
modifier: for example, forcing a door open would just be
[glo:dice-notation "`2d6 + Strength Mod`"].

![Chance of success for a task check against a difficulty of 8.](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/basic.png)

The average result for [glo:dice-notation "`2d6`"] is 7, but the usual
difficulty target is 8.  The average characteristic modifier is 0, but
finishing character creation with skills at level 1 or 2 is easily
doable, so almost all characters do have situations where they have
even-or-better odds.  Even odds isn't that great in a risky situation
though, so the rules implicitly encourage players to seek out other
bonuses, or to change the situation to be safer.

For the graphs in this post, I've make some assumptions about the
ranges of modifiers:

- The characteristic modifier ranges from -3 to +3 (which is the case
  unless you're using the variant rules for extreme characteristic
  scores in the *Traveller Companion*)

- The skill level modifier is -3 for an unskilled character, or ranges
  from 0 to +3 for a skilled character

- Other miscellaneous modifiers specified in the rules range from -4
  to +4

So the total modifier for a roll ranges from -10 to +10.


## Difficulty levels

Checks have eight difficulty levels, with the target number increasing
by 2 every level from Simple (2+) to Impossible (16+).

![Chance of success for a task check, showing all eight difficulties.](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/difficulties.png)

On the one hand, I like having different difficulty levels to pick
from.  On the other hand, this feels like too many.  I'm a big fan of
[only rolling when the outcome is in doubt][], so I'm not sure when
I'd ask for a roll for a Simple or Easy task.  Even a Routine task
feels a bit much.  I'd probably have the [glos:pc] succeed
automatically at all of those (though, with a caveat: see the next
section on timeframes).

"Impossible" is also misnamed, as you just need a +4 total modifier,
which is achievable with a bit of luck in character creation, to have
a chance of success: "impossible" should *mean* "impossible".

Rolling a 16 won't let you punch a hole through a starship with your
bare fists.

[only rolling when the outcome is in doubt]: post/roll-in-the-open.html


## Timeframes

One thing I like a lot about the [glo:traveller] task check system is
that it has rules for increasing or reducing the difficulty of a task
check by going faster or slower.  In most systems, that's kind of up
to [glo:gm] fiat, but here it's codified.

The timeframes are:

- [glo:dice-notation "`1d6`"] seconds
- [glo:dice-notation "`1d6`"] combat rounds
- [glo:dice-notation "`10×1d6 `"] seconds
- [glo:dice-notation "`1d6`"] minutes
- [glo:dice-notation "`10×1d6`"] minutes
- [glo:dice-notation "`1d6`"] hours
- [glo:dice-notation "`4×1d6`"] hours
- [glo:dice-notation "`10×1d6`"] hours
- [glo:dice-notation "`1d6`"] days

There are a few small examples given for each.  For example, applying
first aid takes minutes, whereas repairing a damaged ship takes tens
of hours.

A player can chose to move up or down on the timeframes, doing a check
faster or slower than usual.  Each step moved up (going faster) adds a
cumulative -2 modifier; each step moved down (going slower) adds a
cumulative +2 modifier.

So, while I would not normally make someone roll for a Routine task, I
likely would still have them roll if they were doing an Average task
one step slower than usual.

My only small complaint with the timeframe rules is that I wish this
was explained as adjusting the difficulty level of the check up or
down, rather than as adding a modifier.  The maths is exactly the
same, but it feels inconsistent with the rules for doing multiple
tasks at once, which *are* explained as adjusting the difficulty
level.


## Effect & static target numbers

The "effect" of a task check is by how much the player beat (or failed
to beat) the difficulty.  So, a roll of 9 has effect 3 if the check is
Routine, 1 if the check is Average, -1 if the check is Difficult, and
so on.

There's an optional rule for using the effect to pick a degree of
success, if the situation requires more nuance than just a binary pass
or fail:

- **Exceptional Failure:** the check fails with effect -6 or less
- **Average Failure:** the check fails with effect -5 to -2
- **Marginal Failure:** the check fails with effect -1
- **Marginal Success:** the check passes with effect 0
- **Average Success:** the check passes with effect 1 to 5
- **Exceptional Success:** the check passes with effect 6 or more

We'll see these thresholds again when discussing task chains.

An alternative way to think about [glo:traveller] task checks is that
you're trying to roll an effect of 0 or more.  So, there's a fixed
target number you want to equal or beat, and the [glo:gm] has eight
possible penalties he can subtract from your roll depending on the
difficulty of the situation.

Is that a useful way to look at the rules?  When actually playing,
probably not.  But for this post, it means I don't have to draw eight
separate difficulties in all of the graphs.

![Chance of success for a task check, with target number normalised to zero.](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/normalised-difficulties.png)

So the range on the X axis of the graphs is now -26 (an unskilled
character with a -3 characteristic modifier, with a -4 modifier from
other rules, attempting an "impossible" task) to 8 (a character with a
+3 characteristic modifier and +3 skill level modifier, with a +4
modifier from other rules, attempting an easy task).

But we can trim that range down to -13 to -2, as everything lower has
a 0% chance and everything higher has a 100% chance:

![Chance of success for a task check, with target number normalised to zero (trimmed).](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/normalised-difficulties-trimmed.png)

This is the formulation we'll use going forwards.


## Situational advantages and disadvantages

Let's say that a [glo:pc] is trying to hotwire a locked-down jump
drive.

Perhaps our would-be pirate has an easy time of it.  Maybe they're
blessed with a particularly competent assistant; or there's a detailed
diagram explaining exactly how the lock works.

On the other hand, perhaps they have an unusually hard time.  Maybe
the engine room is really small and awkward, so the [glo:pc] can't get
a good look at the mechanism; or they have shoddy tools.

In these cases, the skill-based task itself (hotwiring the jump drive)
is exactly the same, it's just the circumstances around it which vary.
So making the task check easier or harder doesn't really fit.

To handle this sort of situational effect, the [glo:gm] might give the
player a *boon die* or a *bane die*.  The player now rolls
[glo:dice-notation "`3d6`"], keeping the better (or worse) of the two
rolls.  Or the [glo:gm] might say that success or failure is
impossible given these additional situational factors, and so remove
the roll entirely.

![Chance of success for a task check with a boon or bane die, with target number normalised to zero.](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/boon-bane.png)

Boon and bane dice cancel out and do not stack: a check with one boon
and one bane is rolled normally; a check with two boons is rolled with
one boon; a check with two boons and one bane is rolled with one boon;
and so on.


## Task chains

Let's say that the [glos:pc] are preparing to jump to another system:
the astrogator plots the route, then the engineer inputs it into the
jump drive.  The quality of route should affect how well the engineer
is able to configure the jump drive, and [glo:traveller] handles this
sort of thing with "task chains": a sequence of connected task checks
where the effect of a check applies a modifier to the next check in
the chain.

- If the previous check failed with effect -6 or less, the current check gets a -3 modifier
- If the previous check failed with effect -5 to -2, the current check gets a -2 modifier
- If the previous check failed with effect -1, the current check gets a -1 modifier
- If the previous check passed with effect 0, the current check gets a +0 modifier
- If the previous check passed with effect 1 to 5, the current check gets a +1 modifier
- If the previous check passed with effect 6 or more, the current check gets a +2 modifier

First, let's have a look at the chance each modifier has of coming up:

![Chance of each task chain modifier.](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/task-chain-dms.png)

I find this pleasantly asymmetric.

Now, let's look at the chance of the second task in a chain
succeeding.  Here, the `Total Modifier` in the Y axis does not include
the task chain modifier from the first check (that's why this is a
heatmap and not just a line chart).  The colour shows the chance of
succeeding on the second check: lighter is better.

![Chance of succeeding at the second task in a chain.](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/task-chain-heat.png)

An interesting thing to note here is that because the positive and
negative modifiers from the first check are bounded, there are plenty
of cases where the result of the second check doesn't depend on the
result of the first check at all.  For example, if the second check
has a `Total Modifier minus Difficulty Target` of 1, they will succeed
no matter how badly the first check goes.  But if the second check has
a `Total Modifier minus Difficulty Target` of -15, they will fail no
matter how well the first check goes.

So, with a huge penalty, the players will need to seek out some other
advantage: like going more slowly and carefully, reducing the
difficulty at the cost of time; or finding some advantage which gives
them a boon.

Compare with what it would look like if the second check just used the
effect of the first check as a modifier directly:

![Chance of succeeding at the second task in a chain, when using the effect of the first check directly.](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/task-chain-heat-unbound.png)

Very different!


## Trying again

Unlike [glo:coc], [glo:traveller] has nothing like [pushing a roll][].
So if you want to allow a player to try a task check again, you'll
have to improvise.

I think either the pushed-roll system (try again, but with
significantly worse consequences for failure) or a task chain (try
again, but with a modifier based on how badly you failed) would work,
and each probably makes more sense in different situations.

![Chance of succeeding ehen trying a check again, with target number normalised to zero.](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/try-again.png)

Pushing a roll is always better than doing a task chain.  Because the
first roll failed, the second roll in the chain will always have a
negative modifier; whereas a pushed roll is just a straight re-roll.
So keep that in mind if the character is really poorly suited to a
situation: perhaps they *should* first have to climb out of the hole
they dug for themselves, rather than just get a second attempt!

For example, if the [glo:pc] is trying to repair something, and they
badly fail, then a task chain makes sense as they now need to repair
the original damage *and* what new damage they just caused.  Whereas
if the [glo:pc] is trying to find a target in some surveillance tapes,
failure doesn't destroy the tapes, but trying again might cost them
much more time than they're comfortable spending, so pushing the roll
makes more sense.

[pushing a roll]: post/dice-rolls-in-call-of-cthulhu.html


## Going head-to-head

For opposed checks, the two characters simply roll, and the one with
the higher effect wins.  Though oddly, at least to me, the
degree-of-success rule is *not* used here: it's just the raw effect
number.

Here the colour shows the first character's chance of succeeding
despite the second character's opposition: lighter is better.

![Chance of succeeding at an opposed roll.](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/opposed-heat.png)

Opposed checks are used if two characters are directly competing with
or opposing each other.  They're generally *not* used in combat
(except for grappling), where the defender imposes a negative modifier
to the attacker's roll instead, rather than themselves rolling to
resist.  I think I prefer opposed combat rolls, but systems which do
them seem pretty rare.

If it did use the degrees of success, it would look like this:

![Chance of succeeding at an opposed roll.](files/dice-rolls-in-traveller/opposed-heat-chain-dm.png)

This looks like it could be an interesting mechanic to me!  The second
character's ability to oppose is limited, and so the first character
has better odds overall.

But, interesting as it might be, it's not a rule.  Maybe a "negative
task chain" would make sense as a house-rule for asynchronous
conflicts?


## The golden rule

As always, before rolling anything, ask if a roll is *really* needed
here.

If the task is challenging but the [glo:pc] can spend as long on it as
they want, shouldn't they just automatically succeed?
