---
draft: true
title: Divine Favour
date: 2021-03-07
topic: mechanics
system: mythras
excerpt: |
    An alternative luck mechanic for Mythras, flavoured as Divine
    Favour.  Favour can only be gained by doing things pleasing to the
    gods, and can be lost by doing things displeasing to them.
---

This is a replacement for the Luck mechanic in [glo:mythras], giving
something which works more like [glo:coc].  It should be broadly
applicable to any [glo:dice-notation "d100"] roll-under system, if you
tweak what Favour can be spent on.

## Character Creation

When creating a character, roll [glo:dice-notation "`5Ã—(2d6+6)`"] and
record that as their Divine Favour score.

## Using Favour

Favour represents how well the gods think of a character and is a
combination of good fortune and magical aid the players can call upon
to get out of a sticky situation or to twist chance to their benefit.

### Adjust Dice Rolls

**Cost:** 1 for 1.

Players can spend Favour to alter the result of any roll which affects
them on a 1 for 1 basis.  This can be a skill roll, damage roll, or
anything else which directly affects the character, even those made by
another character.

A player cannot spend Favour to change a roll which does not affect
their character.  For example, a damage roll made against another
member of their party.

### Gain an Action Point

**Cost:** 20.

A character who has exhausted their Action Points during a combat
round may spend 20 Favour to gain an additional Action Point.

A character may not gain more than one Action Point in the same round
through Favour.

### Mitigate Damage

**Cost:** 20.

A character who suffers a Major Wound may spend 20 Favour to downgrade
the injury to a Serious Wound.  This reduces the damage taken to one
Hit Point less than what would be required to inflict a Major Wound.

### Avoid Certain Death

**Cost:** all, at least 30 required.

If a character has 30+ Favour remaining, all may be spent to bring
them back from certain death.  The character immediately gains
[glo:dice-notation "`1d6+1`"] Hit Points, which the player allocates
amongst their Hit Locations.

The character is taken out of the current scene and returns in the
next.  The player should describe what happened and how the character
managed to survive what should have killed them.

## Gaining Favour

A character can increase their Favour, gaining a small, medium, or
large number of points, by doing things pleasing to the gods:

- A **small** gain is [glo:dice-notation "`1d5`"]

- A **medium** gain is [glo:dice-notation "`1d10+5`"]

- A **large** gain is [glo:dice-notation "`2d10+10`"]

Here are some suggested tasks which could gain Favour:

- Perform a service for a temple.

- Vanquish an evil creature.

- Rescue a member of the faithful.

- Make an appropriate sacrifice, either personally or by paying a
  temple to do it.

- Throw a lavish party in honour of your heroic deeds and the gods who
  gave you the opportunity to perform them.

- Go on a pilgrimage.

- Fund the construction of a new temple.

## Losing Favour

If a character commits to doing something which will gain them Favour,
such as agreeing to perform some service for a temple, and then goes
back on that commitment, they *lose* Favour equal to however much they
would have gained.

Breaking your god's commandments can also cause a character to lose
Favour.  Whether this is a small, medium, or large loss depends on who
the god is, who the character is, and how serious the infraction is.

A lay-person breaking a minor commandment is likely to be overlooked,
unless it happens repeatedly, or the god demands perfection from their
followers.  A priest may not have such leniency though.

Losing Favour can take the character below 0 Favour.

## Roleplaying Effects

Godly [glos:npc] have an intuitive sense of how beloved a character is
of the gods, and will act differently towards a character who has (or
has had) very high Favour or negative Favour.

Honouring the gods by constructing a new temple gives a good
reputation which is slow to fade away, even if the character then
spends all of their Favour points.

Similarly, the bad reputation gained when betraying your word and
ending up with negative Favour is slow to be forgotten.
