---
title: How to Learn a New System
date: 2021-07-21
topic: gm-advice
header_image_title: Ezra Reads the Law to the People (Gustave Dor√©)
excerpt: |
    Here's how to learn a new RPG system.  Or at least, how *I* learn a
    new RPG system.  In brief: skim through the book, practice making
    some characters, read the book more carefully, run a one-shot, make
    cheatsheets, and then run that campaign.
---

Over the past month I've been preparing to run a [glo:traveller]
campaign: I've been reading the books, watching scenario reviews,
pitching the campaign (Matt Colville has a great video on [campaign
pitches][], check it out) to my players... and all of this because we
did a one-shot a while back and quite enjoyed it.

I'm not an experienced [glo:traveller] [glo:gm].  I've been learning
the rules as much as I've been preparing adventure hooks, so learning
a new system has been on my mind lately.

RPGs are usually taught through a kind of oral tradition: the [glo:gm]
teaches the players through play, and some people manage to go years
playing a game before they even read any of the books at all.  But
that doesn't work so well if the [glo:gm] is *you*.  While yes, you
could seek out and play in a campaign using the system you want to
learn, that'll take a long time, and might not even be feasible.

So, this is the approach I've taken the last few times I've needed to
learn a new system.  It might not work for you, but hopefully there's
at least one thing you can take away from this.

[campaign pitches]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MtH1SP1grxo

## Step 1: Skim the book

I quickly skim through the book, starting with the table of contents,
to get an idea of what it covers and where everything is.  At this
stage I'm aiming for a broad awareness of the rules, not a detailed
understanding.  So I'll likely skip over tables or statblocks or other
bits of detail like that.

I might throw the system out at this step.  Maybe it turns out it's
not going to be a good fit for my group, or maybe it's just not quite
what I expected.  There might not be anything *wrong* with the system,
it's just not *right* either.

For example, I currently have the [RuneQuest: Roleplaying in Glorantha
slipcase set][] sitting unused on my shelf.  I got it because I liked
the premise and knew it was a somewhat similar system to [glo:coc],
which I do know very well, but the rules are a fair bit more fiddly
and also there's not really been an opening in either of my gaming
groups for a new fantasy campaign yet.  I might return to it later, or
maybe I won't.  I don't begrudge giving Chaosium the money, I've had
years of fun from their products already.

[RuneQuest: Roleplaying in Glorantha slipcase set]: https://www.chaosium.com/runequest-roleplaying-in-glorantha-slipcase-set/

## Step 2: Make some characters

The first mechanics I like to really get to grips with are the ones
for character creation, for two reasons:

1. This is likely going to be my players first experience of the
   system, so when I'm guiding them through character creation I want
   it to go smoothly, just so we don't start with a bad first
   impression.

2. I can use the characters I create as running examples to help me
   understand the other rules, rather than trying to understand things
   in abstract.

So I'll make a character.  And then another.  And another.  I'll make
characters until I feel I've got a solid understanding of how it all
works.  I might (and likely will) forget the specifics of this by the
time I actually get around to running a campaign, but I find the
knowledge generally comes back easily enough when I need it.

For example, for my upcoming [glo:traveller] game, I'm planning to
include one of the optional sourcebooks on alien cultures, which has
some alternative character creation rules for alien [glos:pc].  So I
made a few characters using the standard rules, then a few characters
using the variant rules, to help fix the differences in my mind.

## Step 3: Read the book

Next I read the book cover-to-cover.  I might skip some sections which
aren't relevant to the game I'm planning to run, for example if I'm
only planning to run a one-shot I might be able to just rule out whole
chapters of the book as out-of-scope.

But generally, I read the whole thing.

## Step 4: Run a one-shot

At this point I'm pretty confident in my understanding of the rules
(or at least, in my ability to look up rules during a session) and
that this is a game my group would enjoy.  So the next step is to
confirm that with the players, by running a one-shot.

A one-shot is great for getting player feedback on a potential new
system, and also for seeing what it's like in play.  Maybe there's
some aspect of the rules which you thought would be fine, but which is
actually kind of annoying, or vice versa.  I think the bar for fun is
a bit lower in a one-shot than it is in a campaign.  If everyone knows
that you're playing one or two sessions of this game and then might
never touch it again, it's a lot easier to put up with a mechanic you
don't like, and enjoy the game despite any issues.

In my [glo:coc] game, we play a one-shot after each major story arc,
and there are always systems we want to try, so this works out nicely
for us.

## Step 5: Decide next steps

The one-shot could go one of three ways:

1. We decide that this *isn't* a game we want to play more of.  This
   recently happened with [glo:godbound] for us: I found it hard to
   come up with fun challenges for a party of 5 demigods, and the idea
   of doing that for a whole campaign wasn't appealing

2. It's fun, but we can't see ourselves doing a campaign of this.
   Maybe that will change over time but, for now at least, this is a
   game for one-shots.

3. It's fun, and we want a campaign.  Maybe not right now, but
   certainly at some point.

For us, [glo:traveller] was a definite (3).  One of the players wanted
a sci-fi game, which is why I was looking into [glo:traveller] in the
first place, and then the one-shot went well so we decided we wanted
more.  But we were in the middle of a [glo:coc] campaign right then,
so it would come some time in the future.

A little under a year later, the future is now.

## Step 6: Make cheatsheets

Next I go through the book *again*.  Maybe even more than one book if
the campaign I want to run would benefit from me having some
supplements.  This time I'm making cheatsheets.

Making cheatsheets serves three purposes:

1. By reading the rules *again* and rewriting and summarising them in
   my own words, I further cement my understanding.  There are cases
   where I've only realised at this point that I had misunderstood or
   misread a rule the first few times.
   
2. It gives me a reference sheet to use in play.
   
3. It gives my players a reference sheet to use in play.

(2) and (3) are slightly different use-cases.  There is information
which I, as the [glo:gm], will need, but the players will not.  For
example, the appropriate sanity loss for finding a mangled corpse.
But it's not too tricky to make a cheatsheet which caters to both
these cases.  Players may find it a little verbose, but it's easier
than making two cheatsheets.

But a cheatsheet is supposed to be short, and if it's getting too long
I'll cut some of the player-facing content first.  I expect my players
to know how their characters work.  So I won't necessarily include,
for example, all of the [glo:pc] abilities---for games I am a player
in, I sometimes make a personal cheatsheet which has that sort of
thing---but even without getting into such specifics, there's a lot of
overlap in what's useful for me and what's useful for them.

For example, here is a cheatsheet I made for [glo:traveller] covering
[the basic, non-spacecraft, rules][], and here is a
cheat"sheet" (it's more of a document; I'd do it differently now)
summarising [the rule changes in Pulp Cthulhu][].

A single sheet of paper (two sides of content) is the ideal, but it's
better to spill over onto a second piece of paper than miss out
something you'll need to reference a lot.

[the basic, non-spacecraft, rules]: files/how-to-learn-a-new-system/traveller.pdf
[the rule changes in Pulp Cthulhu]: files/how-to-learn-a-new-system/pulp-cthulhu.pdf

## Step 7: Run a campaign

Now it's time to run that game.  So go through all the usual steps:

- Pitch your campaign idea(s) to your players
- Run a session 0
- Do character creation
- Have that first session
- Keep playing!

I like to do character creation all together, but I think it's
*essential* if starting a campaign in a new system.  If everyone makes
characters independently in a system they've never played before,
there *will* be misunderstandings, and so someone might create an
invalid character, or make a different character to the one that they
wanted because they thought they couldn't do something.

Doing character creation as a group activity lets you guide everyone
through the process, and hopefully prevents any misunderstandings (or
at least makes them consistent).

## Step 8+: Iterate

As you play, mistakes will be made.

Maybe you misinterpret a rule, or the cheatsheet is wrong, or you
forget something.  I find it helpful to review the rules after the
first few sessions, and after any new mechanics get introduced, to try
to catch these mistakes early on.  Then I can just update the
cheatsheet, let the players know what we got wrong, and try to do
better from then on.

Now, go learn that game.
