---
title: Fleshing out clan Iuwoi
date: 2022-05-19
topic: setting
system: traveller
---

In *The Borderland Run*, an adventure for Traveller by Mongoose
Publishing, the travellers are hired to transport a package to the
palace of clan *Iuwoi* on [Tyokh][] by a deadline.  Their employer
doesn't exactly know what the consequences for late delivery will be,
but at the very least, the travellers will be paid less.

If you're a player in that adventure, or might play it in the future,
turn back now: **there will be spoilers!**

[Tyokh]: https://travellermap.com/?p=-93.098!14!7&options=41983&style=print


## The Aslan

If you've never run Traveller before, or looked into the
official setting much, think of the Aslan as honour-obsessed
warrior-poets who basically think of all non-Aslan as incomprehensible
barbarians.

They don't have an overall government, they have many thousands of
clans, some of which are vassals to another clan, but many more of
which are independent.  Political shenanigans are rampant.

Aslan are descended from a predator species, so they're violent, quick
to take offense, and are obsessed with owning land.  To avoid
destroying themselves, over the millennia they've developed a complex
system of honour and ritualised warfare.

I really like running Aslan [abbr:npc "NPCs"].  You can play them as kind of like
just really upstanding humans who sometimes make weird suggestions
("Why do we not simply kill this man where he stands? He is a criminal
and has offended your honour!"), or have them be really steeped in
Aslan culture to the point where they have trouble even dealing with
money, or understanding why you have a problem with them conquering
some planet ("Surely you do not think this weak president, who cannot
even defend his territory, is a good ruler?")

Fortunately, my campaign is taking place in the Trojan Reach sector,
and so Aslan can show up just about anywhere.

Like in this adventure.


## Background of the adventure

Many of the Aslan clans and corporations of the Trojan Reach have
business interests outside Aslan space, with the *Tlaiowaha* and their
vassals the *Ahroay'if* dominating trade with the human Third Imperium
in particular.  But they're not the only clans: there's also the
*Htyowao* (vassals of the *Ahroay'if*), *Iuwoi* (unclear if they're
independent or vassals of another clan), and many more.

The Aslan prince Hteleitoirl of the *Iuwoi* recently set off beyond
Aslan space to make a name for himself.  He tried to conquer
[Arunisiir][], which is nominally ruled by Aslan but in practice ruled
by their human advisors.  He failed catastrophically: many of his
followers were killed or captured, and he only barely escaped.  Even
worse, this caused some human / Aslan business deals to collapse.  It
would be embarrassing but bearable if only the *Iuwoi* were involved
but, alas, other clans (the *Htyowao* are named, but there are more)
are affected too.  And these other clans are not happy.

War is threatened and Iuwoiko, Hteleitoirl's father the clan lord,
regretfully orders the execution of his son to placate the other
clans, and now the travellers have to get Hteleitoirl back home in
time to be killed: yes, the cargo they have been hired to transport
turns out to be an Aslan prince.  They don't know that they're taking
Hteletoirl to his execution, or that he is the one who lead the recent
attack on Arunisiir, but if they win his friendship, he will explain
matters to them.

Well, that's what has happened on the surface.

In actuality, Hteleitoirl's conquest was doomed from the start.  The
*Htyowao* managed to turn a high-ranking member of the *Iuwoi*
traitor, learned of this expedition, arranged for mercenaries to be
present to defend Arunisiir, and now are leading the call for war
against the *Iuwoi*, saying that the failure of the *Iuwoi* has harmed
their, the *Htyowao's*, interests.  Furthermore, they're conspiring to
keep Hteleitoirl from getting back to Tyokh in time, so that they can
then say that the *Iuwoi* have, yet again, failed to do the right
thing.

It's all a set-up: either the *Iuwoi* face war with multiple clans, or
the clan lord has to sacrifice his favourite son.

[Arunisiir]: https://travellermap.com/?p=-89.634!19!7&options=41983&style=print


## Fleshing out the Iuwoi

The module doesn't give much information about the *Iuwoi*, other than
that they have a palace on Tyokh and business interests in the
Borderland Subsector of the Trojan Reach.

We get even less about the antagonists, the *Htyowao*, but they're
covered a little in other books like *The Pirates of Drinax* and *The
Trojan Reach*.  We learn that they're a minor clan, vassals of the
*Ahroay'if*, and are in conflict with a rival clan the *Hkaaiheir*.
The *Ahroay'if* themselves are an incredibly wealthy trader clan,
controlling 60% of the trade going through Tyokh.

The *Htyowao's* motivation isn't directly given, but I think we can
infer that it's to gain status by eliminating a trade rival of the
*Ahroay'if* their patrons, and to look competent and honourable while
doing it.

But I wanted more.

Fortunately, there is [an excellent series of posts about Aslan
clans][] by Garnfellow, which I've been enjoying every time a new
entry came up on the [Traveller subreddit][].  Time to roll some dice!

[an excellent series of posts about Aslan clans]: https://greatdungeonnorth.blogspot.com/search/label/Aslan
[Traveller subreddit]: https://old.reddit.com/r/traveller/

### Major or Minor?  Independent or Vassal?

I decided that the *Iuwoi* are an independent minor clan.

Despite the *Htyowao* themselves being a fairly minor clan (they're a
vassal of a vassal), they're still able to scheme against the *Iuwoi*,
in a fairly underhanded way, without the *Ahroay'if* telling them to
knock it off.  So the *Iuwoi* can't be massively stronger than the
*Htyowao*.

[Independent Aslan Clans][] is a good resource on these.  I figured
that an Aslan clan lord would probably have his main palace and base
of operations on a world the clan owns, if they have one.  Since the
*Iuwoi* palace is on Tyokh, which they definitely don't own, then
they're probably a small clan with holdings on a handful of worlds
which they share with other clans.

Rolling on the "small clan holdings" table, I got a two: the *Iuwoi*
have holdings on a single world: Tyokh.

[Independent Aslan Clans]: https://greatdungeonnorth.blogspot.com/2022/01/independent-clans.html

### Holdings

Ok, so the *Iuwoi* are a small clan who own some of Tyokh.  How much?

[Aslan Clan Holdings][] has us covered here.  It specifies clan land
ownership in terms of "world hexes", where a world hex is about
870,000km^2.

Rolling on the "random clan holdings" table, I got a one: the *Iuwoi*
have up to 11 world hexes.

Since those hexes are on Tyokh, which has a population density of 125
people per km^2 (8000km in diameter with 60% surface water, so
approximately 8Ã—10^6km^2 solid land, with a population on the order of
10 billion), it's probably closer to 0 than 11.

Frankly, even one world hex seems pretty excessive on Tyokh if that's
all solid ground, that's over a tenth of the planet!

Let's roll up population and then return to this.

[Aslan Clan Holdings]: https://greatdungeonnorth.blogspot.com/2022/02/aslan-clan-holdings.html

### Population

[Aslan Clan Populations][] has some handy estimates of how populated
Aslan worlds and clans should be, based on source material that's
already been published, and it gives a couple of tables we can roll
on.

We need to know the clan holdings before we can roll the population.
But I think we can safely assume the *Iuwoi* have under 4 world hexes,
given that they're based on the super-in-demand Tyokh.  There is no
way a clan which can control nearly a half of Tyokh is also weak
enough for a minor clan like the *Htyowao* to sensibly scheme against.

I rolled a five on the "random clan population code by holdings"
table, and a three on the "random clan pop multiplier" table.  So that
gives the *Iuwoi* a population of approximately 90,000.

Now let's return to the holdings question.  Tyokh has a population
density of 125 people per km^2, so the *Iuwoi* could reasonably be
packed into just 720km^2: way less than even a single world hex.

However, *The Trojan Reach* tells us that Tyokh's startown is really
densely populated, and the rest of the planet is much more typically
Aslan: spread-out population centres with everyone having their own
small bit of land, with jungle and wild animals occupying the same
land as cities and palaces.  And it also tells us that Aslan cities
tend to have a population density of about a tenth of human cities.

I tried looking at a list of UK towns ranked by population, and picked
a few in the 80,000 to 100,000 range, but a lot of them were really
dense!  Far more than the 125 people per km^2 which Tyokh is as a
whole.

At this point I gave up.  Let's just say the *Iuwoi* lands have a
population density of 60 Aslan per km^2, just under half that of Tyokh
overall.  Which means the *Iuwoi* own 1500km^2.

Not a lot of land, but it is a very desirable planet.

It would be very nice if a future supplement were to go into more
detail about Aslan settlements, as it's kind of hard to drill down
from aggregate statistics about the entirety of Aslan space to the
holdings of individual clans on particular worlds.  If I run more
adventures on Aslan worlds, it would be great if I knew enough to
improvise a typical Aslan town, without it just feeling like a human
town but where everyone is a 7 foot lion man.  I want my aliens to
feel alien!

[Aslan Clan Populations]: https://greatdungeonnorth.blogspot.com/2022/02/aslan-clan-populations.html

### Age

The final characteristic I wanted to think about was [Aslan Clan
Age][].  There are others I could roll up, like tradition and
aggression, but age seemed the most important for a small trading
clan.  The *Iuwoi* are clearly not so aggressive or traditional that
they're above or incapable of dealing significantly with humans.

Rolling on the "aslan clan age" table I got a five and a three: the
*Iuwoi* are a fairly young clan, founded some time after 613 (by the
Imperial calendar) when the Peace of Ftahalr was drawn up but before
the Solomani Rim War in 950.  The current year in my campaign is 1107
Imperial, so the clan is between 494 and 157 years old.

[Aslan Clan Age]: https://greatdungeonnorth.blogspot.com/2022/04/clan-age.html


## In Summary

The *Iuwoi* are a small young independent trading clan, with a
population of 90,000 and holdings on a single world.  They were
founded well after Aslan settled in the Trojan Reach and yet their
holdings are on a very significant trade centre, Tyokh, which probably
makes some old clans, and some young but less accomplished clans,
think of them as upstarts.

They're not that powerful militarily, but still significant enough
that the *Htyowao* couldn't take them on alone, they had to dupe some
other clans into participating in this scheme (though, that could just
be because the *Htyowao* are also occupied by their war with the
*Hkaaiheir*).

I think a small clan like this is a good gateway towards further
adventures in Aslan space, as they can't do everything by themselves
and so need help (like the players) on occasion.
