---
title: Izirion's Enchiridion of the West Marches
date: 2021-06-01
topic: reviews
---

[Izirion's Enchiridion of the West Marches][] is a source book for
West Marches style play, which I kickstarted earlier this year.
It's written for fifth edition [abbr:dnd], but has an appendix giving
some guidance for using it with [abbr:osr] systems.

In addition to the usual rules, setting, and examples, the book has
frequent asides explaining *why* something has been designed the way
it has been, or to give further advice.  This is great, because if you
internalise these asides, you can more easily deal with situations
which the rules *don't* cover.  You don't have to guess at the
intention of the rules from the text, it's right there in front of
you.

For example, a section on worldbuilding has this aside on why you
should keep the "danger level" within each region more-or-less
consistent:

![Why Have Danger Level?](izirions-enchiridion/danger-level.jpg)

[Izirion's Enchiridion of the West Marches]: https://www.drivethrurpg.com/product/333956/Izirions-Enchiridion-of-the-West-Marches


## What's in the book

13 pages of **frontmatter and introduction**, giving an overview of
the West Marches style of play for people unfamiliar with it,
also covering safety tools and some potentially sensitive topics that
might come up in your game.

14 pages on **survival and travel**, broken down into five large
subsections on travel (including getting lost), weather, food & water
(including what happens if you consume unclean food or water),
surveying & hunting, and hazards (both weather and terrain hazards).
14 pages to cover all that doesn't sound like much, but the text is
very small and the pages are quite large, so there's a lot of content
here.

Travel in the Marches is dangerous.  Navigation is by compass
directions and visible landmarks, not fuzzy things like "the temple we
passed last week".  Even putting aside the possibility of getting
caught in an avalanche or a blizzard, you can get lost, encounter
monsters, or run out of resources.

30 pages on **worldbuilding**, broken down into four large subsections
on the town (the safe home base of the [abbr:pc "PCs"]), regions, factions,
and dungeons.

Since a party might travel through the same region in the Marches many
times, these locations have to work for repeat visits and for
differing character levels.  While regions and dungeons will have a
broadly consistent danger level, as mentioned above, they can have
isolated pockets of danger, giving a challenge for returning
adventurers.  Ben Robbins, the creator of the West Marches
style, called these "[treasure rooms][]", and the Enchiridion covers
not only treasure rooms, but also how to change dungeons and regions
over time if (for example) the party clear out the current inhabitants
and then leave it open for someone else to move in.

Unlike regular [abbr:dnd], a dungeon isn't a one-time challenge in the
Marches.

13 pages on **narrative**, covering the mechanical basis of emergent
narrative (and, I'm happy to see, the authors agree with me on [not
fudging dice][]), how to create narrative through lore and encounters,
and why a comprehensive [abbr:pc] backstory is actually a *hinderance*
in a West Marches game.

![Dice Rolls in Preparing vs. Running](izirions-enchiridion/dice-rolls.jpg)

Often, players arrive at the game table for the very first session
with an idea of who they want to play, and even with a backstory
written up for the [abbr:gm] to use to generate relevant story hooks.
But that approach doesn't work well in the West Marches, because
*who you were before coming to the town doesn't matter*.  The story
comes from what the [abbr:pc "PCs"] do and how they change; who they *were*
merely informs how they start out.

5 pages on **player options**, which is probably the least useful
section if you're not using something [abbr:dnd]-based.  It gives some
feats and class changes, and argues that you should use XP levelling
(rather than milestone levelling), and that you can give XP for
exploration as well as for combat.

If your system of choice doesn't use XP, levels, or classes, then this
section doesn't have much to offer.

23 pages of **worked examples**, across two sections, the first
building an example swamp region, a faction, and a small dungeon; and
the second building a more fleshed-out faction: a coven of hags and
their hangers-on.

Examples are always great to have.  I find a good worked example
really helps me understand how the system is meant to be used.  In
source books I usually like to see sample scenarios, but the
player-driven nature of the West Marches doesn't lend itself so
well to that style of play: a dungeon is more useful here than a
story.

3 pages of 20 **magic items**, but I'm not much of a "magic item"
person.  Magical boots which let you ignore difficult terrain, or a
magical apron which makes things in its pockets rot more slowly, or a
magical cloak which let you teleport are all in danger of making magic
feel too mundane in my opinion.  I'm fine with magical tools (for
example, in my current [abbr:dnd] game I have a magnifying glass which
lets my character see magic much like the *Detect Magic* spell) and
magical weapons and armour, but magical clothes are just a step too
far.

![Boots of Cartography](izirions-enchiridion/boots-of-cartography.jpg)

In a setting where resource management is key, I feel that magic needs
to be risky, limited, or both.  Not just something you get by putting
on a pair of boots.

3 pages of 20 **crafting materials** these, on the other hand, I do
like.  Each material has a short paragraph of flavour text and some
effects, like "all objects made from Ignan brass glow with a dim
reddish light, out to a radius of 5 feet."

I can imagine going out on a quest to an abandoned dwarven mining
outpost, to get some rare ore, and bring it back to the town to have
some special item made.  That's an adventure right there.

2 pages on **[abbr:osr] conversion**, covering lethality, difficulty
classes, saving throws, encumbrance, conditions, and monsters.  Since
[abbr:osr] systems are all slightly different, this section gives rules
of thumb and not exact formulae for, e.g., how much damage being hit
by an avalanche should do.  This section looks like it'll be useful
for converting to non-[abbr:dnd]-based games too.

And finally, 16 pages of **summaries**, covering [abbr:dnd] conditions,
and a big collection of all the tables used elsewhere in the book.
It's mostly tables, actually.  I've not tried using this in game yet,
but the tables are grouped by topic, so it seems like it'd work well.

[treasure rooms]: http://arsludi.lamemage.com/index.php/81/grand-experiments-west-marches-part-4-death-danger/
[not fudging dice]: roll-in-the-open.html


## My overall thoughts

I've not run a game with the book yet, but I'm looking forward to
trying it out.  The survival & travel chapter in particular has opened
my eyes to how to make traipsing through the wilderness more
interesting than just "you walk through the forest for three days and
*roll* get lost."

![The physical book: a hardback, with pages which don't lay flat](izirions-enchiridion/book.jpg)

The book is a bit [abbr:dnd]-specific, but it would be unfair to
criticise it for that because it didn't pretend to be otherwise.  In
fact, by including a chapter with tips on how to convert it for
[abbr:osr] systems it's already more system-neutral than most modern
[abbr:dnd] material.

I only really have two major complaints about the book.

Firstly, the text is *very* small.  Each page is very dense.  I think
the book could easily have coped with, say, twice the font size and
double the number of pages, which would bring it up to 252 pages.
Though, it is a bit verbose in parts, so a second edition with some
editing likely wouldn't even be as long as that.

Secondly, it's a hardback, but with a glued binding rather than sewn.
So the pages don't lie flat when the book is open.  This makes it just
that bit more awkward to use in the game, where if you leave it lying
open on the table you may need to press it down to read a bit of text,
or a page may flip over by itself.

Those are pretty small problems, and I'll probably use the PDF
in-game, or print out specific bits to glue to a screen, rather than
use the physical book directly.

So, unless those are deal-breakers for you, this book is worth
checking out.
